Path: cantaloupe.srv.cs.cmu.edu!das-news.harvard.edu!husc-news.harvard.edu!hsdndev!wupost!tulane!ukma!smith Newsgroups: rec.sport.baseball Subject: Re: Eck vs Rickey (was Re: Rickey's whining again) Message-ID: <C4oF8s.ECv@ms.uky.edu> From: smith@ms.uky.edu (Brian Smith) Date: 30 Mar 93 00:41:15 GMT Expires: Sat, 1 May 1993 04:00:00 GMT References: <1993Mar11.061739.21570@mnemosyne.cs.du.edu> <C4EsxE.Ly2@megatest.com> <6998@blue.cis.pitt.edu> Distribution: usa Organization: University Of Kentucky, Dept. Math Sciences Lines: 169 In article <6998@blue.cis.pitt.edu> genetic+@pitt.edu (David M. Tate) writes: I've read followups this, I thought I'd go back original article make specific comments method: jao@megatest.com (John Oswalt) said: He obtained play play records, computer readable form, every major league baseball game past several years. He devised algorithm I call "sum-over-situations", wrote computer program calculate every major league players contribution using it. It works like this: Look every "situation" every game baseball season. A situation determined inning, score, baserunners are, many outs are. For situation, count many times team eventually game situation occured in, divide number times situation came up, come "value" situation. This first done George Lindsey late '50s/early '60s, eported Article: An Investigation Strategies Baseball Author: George R. Lindsey Journal: Operations Research Issue: Volume 11 #4, July-August 1963, pp. 477-501 Later, Pete Palmer thing using simulated seasons generate larger set data avoid kind small-sample anomalies people worried about. He reported _The_Hidden_Game_of_Baseball_ (with John Thorn). Gary Skoog modified method bit work called "Value Added" measure based situational values. His based directly marginal runs, though, win probabilities. These results, applied 198? season, reported one Bill James Baseball Abstract books (1987? Help here, somebody...) For example, situation might inning 3, score 2-0, runner second outs. There 4212 regular season major league games last ear. (With Rockies Marlins, year.) Say situation came 100 those, team ahead 5 them. Then value situation 0.75. [Description method: look change win probability based bat plus baserunning, credit/debit player amount time gets plate appearance.] Now, player, sum at-bat base-running values season obtain overall value player. Obviously sum players' values game, season whole, 0. That's always credit +x batter -x pitcher; there's validation involved. OK, there's big problem nobody yet commented on: you're adding *probabilities*, probabilities don't add. Runs add; total team runs breaks many runs Joe contributed plus many runs Fred contributed, etc. But probabilities don't work way. If Bob increases team's chance winning 1% 400 PAs, mean Bob increased team's chance winning 400%. In fact, doesn't mean *anything*, units screwy. I agree disagree. John saying batters efforts result 4 wins losses. While probably correct 400% mean 4 wins losses, means something. I would rather player increased teams chances winning 1% 400 PAs I would player increased chances winning .5% 400 PAs. Thus, appears obvious positive association John's statistic winning games. Thus, disregard stat, appears study must go sort relationship is. Consider example: Bob hits 2-out solo HR bottom first; .12 scale. He thing fourth, score tied, another .14. And again, seventh, score tied, another .22. And, finally, ninth win game score 7-6, value 0.5. Bob hit 4 solo HR 4 plate appearances, credited method .12 + .14 + .22 + .5 = .98. But mean? Was Bob 98% responsible win? Certainly not; defense *always* 50% responsible (if include pitching that), Bob wasn't pitching. In fact, Bob 4/7 offense (which lot, even close 100%). Furthermore, 3 team runs? Say came solo HR Fred; Fred hitting HR tie game, valuable HR take lead (see Lindsey), Fred accrued good .4 rating so. So Fred Bob combined amassed 138% win IN ONE GAME. There's clearly problem here. The problem insistance number mean exactly many wins team has. First, using averages many seasons applying one game. Second, remember players performance take away chance winning. That player ets gets "negative probability" cases. Thus, I'm sure given game add numbers team add 1 game. Sometimes, add one sometime, less one. Also, pitchers' bad performances (giving 6 runs) may given large negative percentage game. Also, batter pulled 0-4 night would give large negatives. Greg thinking right things, intuition mark. Closers enormously important. The total number runs value outweighed come, prevented comming. The doubling Greg allows enough. In another article, I proposed test this. We predict team's won/lost record quite accurately looking many runs *total* score allow, without regard runs score game. If late runs really important early runs, looking late runs lead *better* predictor, right? No, really smaller sample size. I would think however, number runs score first inning would good prediction many runs score last inning. And, realize something else closer usually comes close situation, blow out. It hard argue runs closer gives game equal importance given first inning. Look, closer giving runs often means team lose many games. On, hand starter gives runs often still leaves team chance win. The offence many outs something about. But, I saying late inning situations equally important either. If I 8 runs ninth, really matter many runs pitcher gives ninth. Here's another thought experiment: apply method basketball. What find points scored first *half* game almost exactly value, lead safe entire half yet play. Furthermore, sub bench sinks winning free throws time clock gets +1.0 game, star forward scored 7 points first half spraining ankle gets zero. Does make sense? No, would assume teams probability winning would 0 possesion free throws made. Look, 1 point 5 seconds left, fairly high probability win game possesion ball. And, forget somebody elses missed shots, turnovers, fouls, bad defense, etc. caused "negative chance" team would win. From reading discussion statistic, I feel critisize certain extent agenda. At first look statistic valadates clutchness. But, really not. Cluthness revolves around idea certain players crucial situation elevate performance others performance goes down. I've never seen convincing proof really happens. So, assume clutchness, means except lot noice, statistic positive association player performance. There way get rid noice believe clutchness. Certainly, could find average value home run example. We may find instance, home run increases chance winning 15% average strikeout decreases chance winning 5%. I bet done would find statistic good statistics predicting wins losses. How evaluate relief pitchers? Say John Sam exact pitching statistics (runs, earned runs, K's, BB's, etc.) Both exceptional numbers. John, however pitched closer situations, Sam Mop man. Who valuble team? Probably John. Who better pitcher? They probably same. Brian Smith 