Xref: cantaloupe.srv.cs.cmu.edu rec.autos:102764 rec.autos.tech:53965 rec.autos.sport:29289 rec.autos.driving:16451 rec.autos.vw:14410 alt.autos.antique:2743 news.answers:7748 Newsgroups: rec.autos,rec.autos.tech,rec.autos.sport,rec.autos.driving,rec.autos.vw,alt.autos.antique,misc.consumer,news.answers Path: cantaloupe.srv.cs.cmu.edu!rochester!udel!news.intercon.com!psinntp!balltown!welty From: welty@cabot.balltown.cma.COM (richard welty) Subject: rec.autos: Frequently Asked Consumer/Automotive Questions Message-ID: <1993Apr20.040403.18376@cabot.balltown.cma.COM> Followup-To: rec.autos Keywords: Monthly Posting Reply-To: welty@balltown.cma.com Organization: New York State Institute Sebastian Cabot Studies Date: Tue, 20 Apr 1993 04:04:03 GMT Approved: news-answers-request@MIT.Edu Expires: Thu, 20 May 1993 04:04:03 GMT Lines: 508 Archive-name: rec-autos/part5 [this article one pair articles containing commonly asked automotive questions; article contains questions geared automotive enthusiast, crossposted misc.consumers. -- rpw] [changes 14 April 1993: revised brake fluid section, non-silicone DOT-5 fluids apparently available -- rpw] Commonly Asked Automotive Questions Tire Questions: Q: What funny numbers sides tires mean? A: Typically, see something like 195/60HR14. 195 overall width tire millimeters, tread usually narrower. The 60 `aspect ratio'; indicates height sidewall tire relative overall width. Our example tire sidewall height 0.60 * 195 ~= 117 mm. The 14 wheel diameter inches; also special tires called `TRX' tires three digit metric wheel diameter designations, like 390, millimeters. The R means Radial, H speed rating indicating highest speed tire, properly inflated carrying appropriate load, may safely operate. Common speed ratings S (112MPH), T (118MPH), H (130MPH), V (up 150MPH.) Recent changes method specifying tire sizes move speed rating different part designation; may therefore find designations like 195/60R14 85H; 85 indicates per-tire load associated speed rating -- exceeding load continuous operation rated speed dangerous practice. What follows table showing number `load indices' corresponding maximum per-tire loads: Load Index 50 51 88 89 112 113 145 149 157 Max Load (Kg) 190 195 560 580 1120 1150 2900 3250 4125 Note usual mass vs. weight confusion occurs table. In cases, letters P LT may found front tire size; LT designation indicates Light Truck, P designation indicates Passenger car. If letter given, application tire Passenger car usage. As far I know, letters appear US market. The LT designation prinicipally interest owners light trucks utility vehicles. For owner passenger vehicle, meaningful difference tire P designation one designation all. If aspect ratio omitted, probably 80, may 78. Tires MS (mud/snow) designation may speed rating reduced 20 km/h (about 12mph.) There additional set ratings tires temperature, traction, treadwear. Temperature Traction graded A, B, C (with A best C worst); treadwear numeric rating. These values limited value, assigned somewhat arbitrarily tire manufacturers thus useful comparing different brands tires. Q: My car tires funny size designation: 185/65HR390; put normal tires car? A: Your tires called TRX tires; devised Michelin. Because somewhat different bead design, incompatible normal tires; Michelin used different diameter wheel could mounted wrong type wheel (and conventional tires could mounted TRX type wheels.) You need aquire different wheels put normal tire car; barely possible fit normal tires TRX wheels, horribly dangerous (the tires may simply peel rims corner, possibly blow high speed.) TRX type tires becoming hard find; addition Michelin, Avon makes suitable tires. Goodyear apparently discontinued line TRX tires. Q: Can I rotate radials side side, rotate one side car? A: Car tire manufacturers differing views subject; many say swapping radials left right hand sides car ok (this group includes Michelin Goodyear); others (for example, Pirelli Nokia) void warranties swapping done. The best advice read tire manual carefully rotating tires, stick manufacturer's recommendations. Q: How many snow tires I buy, I buy 2, end car I put on? A: In short, 4, ends. To explain, many drivers areas don't get excessive snow don't drive agressively (or all) snow conditions get away two snows drive wheels, circumstances dangerous practice. With rear wheel drive car, choose able start car going (a function rear axle) stopping turning car (a function front axle.) In front wheel drive car, start, stop, turn front end. The primary risk putting snow tires front put brakes going downhill, run serious risk going downhill backwards. Radar Detectors Speed Limits: Q: Why aren't comments Radar Detectors Speed Limits Q&A posting? A: Because questions detectors speed limits crossposted misc.consumers rec.autos.* always start long, tedious, pointless flame wars. If want talk either topics, please subscribe rec.autos alt.flame keep there. Safety Equipment: Q: Do airbags really work? A: Preliminary statistics suggest following: Airbags work much better belts; good 3 point belts alone work much better Airbags alone, AirBags + 3 point belts work slightly better 3 point belts alone. The con airbags designs tend burn driver's hands venting byproducts explosion occurs inside bag, designs (but all) may knock driver's hands wheel, making retention control vehicle bag deflates difficult. Brake Questions: Q: Do I always need get rotors disk brakes turned? Midas always wants this. A: No. There specific conditions mandate turning replacing rotors; shops try make little extra money replacing rotors often strictly necessary. rotors warped warped, lightly grooved, need replace turn them. Note also rotors (the rotors many Hondas good example) narrow begin practical turn them; must replaced become thin, warped, badly grooved. Q: They tell I downshift braking slow car down. Is really good idea? A: It used good idea, back days mediocre, fade prone drum brakes. In modern disc brake equipped cars, use downshifting slow car really necessary, except cases long, steep downhill runs. Otherwise, modern disc brakes adequate stop passenger car circumstances, much cheaper repair clutch linings. On hand, many standard driver's license tests USA still specify driver tested downshift braking; I suggest taking US driver's test, either 1) learn smoothly (which takes time practice) 2) borrow car automatic take test. Q: How often I replace brake fluid? A: Probably often do. Traditional brake fluids tend absorb water; water corrode internal parts brake system also lower boiling point fluid. DOT-3 type older fluids; DOT-4 DOT-5 newer specifications. The principal differences wet dry boiling points; dry boiling point important fresh brake fluid, wet boiling point important older brake fluid. DOT-3 fluids lowest wet dry boiling point _requirements_; DOT-4 fluids better boiling point requirements; DOT-5 fluids best boiling point requirements (but DOT-5 fluids clearly superior; see next Q&A details.) While requirements imply DOT-4 fluids better DOT-3 fluids, may specific cases DOT-3 fluid preferable, mostly competition applications. Otherwise, DOT-4 type fluids offer _much_ improved brake pedal feel. Replacement year recommended DOT-4 fluids, although agressive drivers may profit changing fluid frequently, least bleeding modest amount fluid brake calipers fairly regularly. Q: What DOT-5 brake fluids? A: This breaks two parts. The DOT-5 specification looks excellent performance, first DOT-5 fluids Silicone based. Silicone fluids tricky proposition. Unlike DOT-3 DOT-4 fluids, absorb water all. While may sound like feature, problem water present pools systems, interfering braking performance corroding metals spot pooling occuring. The water tend migrate downwards braking system brake calipers, corrosion occurs. Because phenomenon, essential converting Silicone empty entire brake system flush throughly beforehand; even recommend replacing rubber parts brake system converting Silicone fluids. Two issues come silicone fluids: 1) difficult pour cleanly (that is, without air bubbles), interferes getting good brake pedal feel, 2) generally much higher boiling points DOT-4 fluids, high temperature failure modes indistinguishable effect boiling DOT-4 fluids. SIlicone fluids may make sense street car applications, certainly recommended high performance driving applications, economics questionable street use. I recently become aware new fluids meet DOT-5 standard contain Silicones; fluids appear reasonably compatible older DOT-3 DOT-4 fluids, I little information time. Q: ABS available cars I'm looking at, costs more. Is worth it? A: This cut dried answer; therefore, answer quite long order cover pros cons. The short answer ABS costs more, initially, maintain, generally work better `average driver' (that say, driver extensive experience high performance driving techniques), may require `unlearning' obsolete braking techniques like pump braking unlearned case. Now long answer. ABS works monitering wheels car, looking signs locked brakes. It may may able able distinguish different wheels (there several systems market.) It cannot detect impending lockup (which would really want ideal world), existence lockup. The sensors used vary; less well designed sensors sensitive tire size, brake pad material, may cease function properly owner deviates original equipment OE-equivalent components. When sensors detect lockup, ABS system responds unlocking brakes (either individually, once, depending system.) If driver keeps foot firmly planted, ABS end cycling locked unlocked states (if sensor existed could detect _impending lockup_, could sit right point, maximum braking effect achieved.) This pulsing often felt brake pedal, system cycles. The percentage time brakes truly engaged called `duty cycle'; typically ABS system 40% On dry pavement, trained driver beat duty cycle quite reliably using technique called threshold braking; wet pavement, braking chancy ABS outperform threshold braking nearly every time. Unfortunately, mud snow, often maximum braking effect acheived brakes locked; Audi, manufacturers producing ABS-equipped cars, seen fit provide disable switch ABS system eventuality. A particularly important feature ABS preserves steering control. This case simply because, braking near limit turn wheel, ABS release brakes sees steering-triggered lockup, back percentage time brakes applied. Braking distances lengthen accordingly. An important caution: ABS cannot exceed maximum theoretical braking force given situation; start sliding glare ice, don't expect ABS system help much. The coefficient friction changed presence ABS system car. As far maintenence goes, addition potential restrictions I've listed above, worry following: 1) parts costs much higher; OE master cylinder obscure european sedan lists $185, OE master cylinder ABS-equipped version car lists $1000. Most manufacturers explicitly forbid use DOT-5 (silicone) brake fluids ABS-equipped vehicles. Because potential cost replacement corroded brake system components, regular (I suggest annual) replacement brake fluid becomes important. Q: What threshold braking business? A: [normally, I'd put consumers Q&A, recent publicity number accidents involving police drivers ABS-equipped Chevy Caprices suggests section needed -- rpw] Threshold braking technique practiced serious high performance drivers; made habit, replaces `stab pedal lock 'em up' panic habit entirely, much prefered. Basically, premise tires generate maximum braking force started slide, wheels lock entirely. Drivers threshold brake learn feel `threshold' feels like, learn search hit application brake pedal. In many cars, feel near threshold pedal starts firm depress it. In case, can't hear tires whine bit, you're near threshold. In car ABS, often twinge pedal system starts cycling; driver backs pedal tad twinge felt, close threshold they'll probably achieve better stopping distances punched let ABS take over. Recently, rash publicity number accidents, one death, involving police cars equipped ABS systems. The police departments question quickly blamed new ABS systems, according Autoweek magazine, seems clear problem lack training; none involved officers recent performance driving training. There reason believe drivers reacted pulsing brake pedal `pump braking', old discredited technique stabbing releasing brake pedal, goal try get brakes back failing hydraulic system. If think minute, you'll realize pump braking must cut effective operation working brake system least 1/2, cut 40% duty cycle ABS system much, giving brakes wrong reason. Threshold braking advantage effective useful technique regardless whether car ABS; fear failed hydraulic system, one two stabs pedal sufficient. Gas Questions: Q: Does High Octane gasoline help? A: Maybe, maybe not. Some cars knock sensors, adjust engine timing turbocharger boost suit gasoline used. On cars, however, use cheapest gas makes car run well. Check owner's manual details car needs. Q: My car made leaded gasoline. Will unleaded gas hurt it? A: It possible unleaded gas may *slightly* increase valve wear, although Amoco Oil company argues otherwise. The actual increase valve wear almost unnoticeable, however, modern leaded gasolines actually contain little lead. You should, however, check owner's manual; many cars early 1970s actually require leaded gasoline. Q: Do fuel treatments help? What kind I use? A: Some don't. During winter, good idea use dry gas; however, may harmful fuel injection systems. Never use additive containing Methanol (sometimes called Methyl Alcohol); additives may damage fuel systems cars carbs almost certainly damage cars fuel injection. Manufacturer's opinions vary additives containing Ethanol (sometimes called Ethyl Alcohol); car fuel injection, check owner's manual car using these. Most manufacturers consider 10% Ethanol acceptable gasoline. Additives Isopropyl Alcohol (Isopropanol), Petroleum Distillates fine fuel injected cars. An occasional bottle fuel injector cleaner helpful cars fuel injectors, although many premium gasolines contain detergents job. Some brands fuel injector cleaners contain Ethanol Methanol; always check ingredients putting anything gas tank. There small number particularly good additives; noticeably expensive run-of-the-mill ones, work much, much better. Among Chevron Techron, Redline SL-1, Wurth `Lubrimoly Ventil Sauber', BG 44K. A bottle one these, every six months, highly recommended. Q: What detergent gasolines? A: The quality detergent packages gasolines varies somewhat; BMW instituted testing program, gasoline brands pass test may advertise fact. Stickers indicating passage test beginning appear fuel pumps gas stations. If gasolines used, fuel injector cleaners probably optional. Beforewarned use BMW approved gasolines keep clean engine clean, may clean motor bad valve deposits. Lubrication Questions: Q: What numbers letters motor oil designation mean? A: There several different items encoded. There two-letter code indicating type detergent package manufacturer uses oil; looks like SE,SF,CD such. The S codes gasoline engine applications; C codes diesel engine applications. The second letter assigned sequence new levels protection developed; thus SF considered better SE, SE considered better SD, forth. The noticeable designation oil weight. This either single number (e.g., 30 weight) pair numbers separated letter W (e.g., 10W30.) The latter type much commonly used days, type automobile manufacturers specify operators manuals. The first number designation (10W) apparent viscosity oil cold; W stands `winter'. The second number (30) viscosity oil hot. There trick here; oil doesn't actually get thicker (turn 10 weight 30 weight) gets hotter. What actually happening oil cold, viscosity cold 10 weight oil. gets hotter, doesn't get thin fast 10W oil would; time temperature, viscosity hot 30 weight oil. Note numbers actually specify ranges viscosities; 10W oils exactly viscosity cold, 30 weight oils viscosity hot. Note also novel behaviour multi-grade oils caused additives, reported sole exception Castrol GTX, 10W40 oils retain multi-grade characteristics well time. 10W30, 15W40, 20W50 oils work well, though. Q: Are `quick lube' places good? A: Some adequate work, quite incompetent ones there. Let buyer beware, watch work, make sure don't overtorque oil drain plug, keep hand wallet times. Q: Are oil additives like Slick-50 Tufoil good? A: Slick-50 Tufoil PTFE-based additives. Many come onto market recently; different moly-based additives around since early 50's. PTFE chemical name Teflon(TM), trademark owned DuPont. In general, auto manufacturers recommend use products. Most USENET responses questions additives favorable (slight increase MPG application, smoother revving) long term results (whether PTFE additives effective 5K miles) debatable. Some manufacturers (such Saab) claim either product engine flush preceeds application causes deterioration oil seals eventual leakage. Some BMW owners reported death valve seals shortly addition Slick 50 cars. This writer cautioned Slick-50 Dealer (!) Slick-50 _not_ used Japanese motors, may clog oil return passages engine. Otherwise, known reports damage caused PTFE additives. On hand, satified Slick 50 customers world. Q: Do synthetic oils really work? A: Yes, but. More specifically, auto manufactuers accept synthetics, disagree extremely long oil change intervals claimed oil manufacturers. Auto manufacturers recommend continue change oil intervals recommended owners manual car. Even decide try longer intervals, least change oil filter regular intervals, synthetics get dirty conventional oils. Synthetic gear lubricants manual transmissions another matter entirely; Amsoil, Redline, AGIP highly regarded effective. Mobil 1 synthetic gear lube gets mixed reviews, however. Q: Manufacturers specifying longer longer oil change intervals. How often I change oil? A: It depends drive. If car always (or nearly always) gets warmed up, don't drive hard keep revs down, manufacturer's recommendation probably fine. If, however, drive hard, drive high revs, alternatively, drive supermarket doesn't get temperature, may wish change oil much often, perhaps 3000 mile intervals (given manufacturers specifying 7500 mile intervals.) If don't drive car much (say 7500 miles year), probably want change oil every six months anyway. If storing car winter, change oil storing change oil bring storage. Misc. Questions: Q: My car timing belt. I hear bad things happen break. What's story? A: It depends internal design motor. Early Ford Escorts, example, suffer severe valve damage belt breaks, newer cars require tow installation new belt. Some Honda motors damaged, others be. If replacement interval specified car, change belt least every 60,000 miles; cars may require frequent replacement. Ask dealer independent mechanic. Also, ask related repairs take place time (for example, Ford Escorts suffer valve damage also timing belt driven water pump, known seize, destroying timing belt, causes major valve damage side effect. Replacing timing belt ignoring water pump costly mistake.) Q: Why would anyone stupid enough design motor self destructs timing belt breaks? A: For performance reasons. Compromising piston design valves pistons collide requires compression ratio engine reduced significantly; likely avoid valve damage economy cars performance oriented vehicles. Q: What causes Unintended Acceleration? A: The final report National Highway, Transportation, Safety Administration concluded unintended acceleration could caused mechanical failure vehicle question time consistent physical evidence. The NHTSA report goes conclude `pedal misapplication' vehicle operator probably cause. -- richard welty 518-393-7228 welty@cabot.balltown.cma.com ``Nothing good ever reported full rotation race car either pitch roll axis'' -- Carroll Smith