Xref: cantaloupe.srv.cs.cmu.edu alt.security.ripem:212 sci.crypt:14832 comp.security.misc:3208 alt.security:9770 comp.mail.misc:12145 alt.answers:132 comp.answers:358 news.answers:7097 Path: cantaloupe.srv.cs.cmu.edu!das-news.harvard.edu!ogicse!uwm.edu!ux1.cso.uiuc.edu!usenet.ucs.indiana.edu!silver.ucs.indiana.edu!mvanheyn rom: mvanheyn@cs.indiana.edu (Marc VanHeyningen) Newsgroups: alt.security.ripem,sci.crypt,comp.security.misc,alt.security,comp.mail.misc,alt.answers,comp.answers,news.answers Subject: RIPEM Frequently Noted Vulnerabilities Message-ID: <C4qoH8.CHE@usenet.ucs.indiana.edu> Date: 31 Mar 93 05:55:55 GMT Article-I.D.: usenet.C4qoH8.CHE Expires: Thu, 20 May 1993 00:00:00 GMT Sender: news@usenet.ucs.indiana.edu (USENET News System) Followup-To: alt.security.ripem Organization: Computer Science, Indiana University Lines: 163 Approved: news-answers-request@MIT.EDU Content-Type: text/x-usenet-FAQ; version=1.0; itle="RIPEM Attacks" Originator: mvanheyn@silver.ucs.indiana.edu Supersedes: <C3JvK9.Ey1@usenet.ucs.indiana.edu> Nntp-Posting-Host: silver.ucs.indiana.edu Mime-Version: 1.0 Archive-name: ripem/attacks Last-update: 31 Mar 93 21:00:00 -0500 SOME POSSIBLE ATTACKS ON RIPEM ------------------------------ This living list potential weaknesses keep eyes open using RIPEM secure electronic mail. It go great detail, almost certainly exhaustive. Obviously, many weaknesses weaknesses cryptographically secured mail general, pertain secure mail programs RIPEM. It maintained Marc VanHeyningen <mvanheyn@cs.indiana.edu>. It posted monthly variety news groups; followups pertaining specifically RIPEM go alt.security.ripem. CRYPTANALYSIS ATTACKS --------------------- - Breaking RSA would allow attacker find private key, ase could read mail encrypted sign messages private key. RSA generally believed resistant standard cryptanalytic techniques. Even standard key (about 516 bits RIPEM) long enough render impractical, barring huge investment hardware breakthrough factoring. - Breaking DES would allow ttacker read given message, since message encrypted DES. It would allow attacker claim you. DES 56 bits key, thus could conceivably compromised brute force sufficient hardware, agencies money devote simply read one message. Since message different DES key, work message would remain high. KEY MANAGEMENT ATTACKS ---------------------- - Stealing private key would allow benefits breaking RSA. To safeguard it, encrypted DES key derived passphrase type in. However, attacker get copy private keyfile passphrase (by snooping network packets, tapping lines, whatever) could break whole scheme. The main risk transferring either passphrase private key file across untrusted link. So don't that. Run RIPEM trusted machine, preferably one sitting right front you. Ideally, machine home (or maybe office) nobody else physical access to. - Fooling accepting bogus public key someone else could allow opponent deceive sending secret messages rather real recipient. If enemy fool intended recipient well, could re-encrypt messages bogus public key pass along. It important get proper public keys people. The common mechanism finger; assuming opponent compromised routers daemons such, finger given fair amount trust. The strongest method key authentication exchange keys person; however, always practical. Having people "vouch you" signing statement containing key possible, although RIPEM doesn't features automatically PGP. RIPEM generate check MD5 fingerprints public keys key files; may exchanged via separate channel authentication. PLAYBACK ATTACKS ----------------  Even opponent cannot break cryptography, opponent could still cause difficulties. For example, suppose send message MIC-ONLY (a PEM mode provide disclosure protection) Alice says "OK, let's that." Your opponent intercepts it, resends Bob, message authenticated telling that. Of course, may interpret entirely different context. Or opponent could transmit message recipient much later, figuring would seen differently later time. Or opponent could change Originator-Name: himself, register public key his, send message hoping recipient send return mail indicating (perhaps even quoting!) unknown message. To defeat playback attacks, plaintext message include indication sender recipient, unique identifier (typically date). A good front-end script IPEM automatically (IMHO). As recipient, sure Originator-Name: header sender indicated within plaintext same, really recipient, message old one. Some also automated. The author FAQ made modest attempt automating process generating checking encapsulated headers; programs included standard distribution utils directory. LOCAL ATTACKS ------------- - Clearly, security RIPEM cannot greater security machine encryption performed. For example, UNIX, super-user could manage get encrypted mail, although would take planning effort something like replace RIPEM executable Trojan horse get copy plaintext, depending it's stored. In addition, link machine running RIPEM extension that. If decrypt RIPEM remote machine connected via network (or, worse yet, modem), eavesdropper could see plaintext (and probably also passphrase.) RIPEM executed systems trust, obviously. In extreme case, RIPEM used machine, total control obody else access to, carefully examined software known free viruses, on. However, there's real trade-off convenience security here. A moderately cautious user might use RIPEM UNIX workstation people access (even root access), increase ecurity keeping private keys (statically linked, ourse) executable floppy disk. Some people keep RIPEM multi-user system, dialing insecure line, download message system perform RIPEM decryption there. However, security provided mechanism somewhat illusory; since presumably type cleartext password log in, you've given away store, since attacker log install traps account steal private key next time use less insecure line. This likely remain situation long systems use rather quaint mechanism cleartext password authentication. I find nice put brief statement carefully I manage security arrangement .plan next public key, potential correspondents aware level precautions place. Some people use two keys, short one carefully managed ordinary use longer one treated greater care critical correspondence. UNTRUSTED PARTNER ATTACKS ------------------------- - RIPEM's encryption ensure person private key corresponding public key used encrypt data may read traffic. However, someone key gets message, may always make whatever kind transformations wishes. There exist cryptographic barriers recipient, say, taking ENCRYPTED message converting MIC-ONLY message, signed readable anyone, although RIPEM provide functionality. Indeed, latest PEM draft I seen specifically states transformations possible allow forwarding functions work. Including recipients plaintext, mentioned above, make possible recipients redistributed message aware original nature. Naturally, security cryptography never greater security people using it. 